So now that we've actually installed and
configured Python and set up IntelliJ,
it's time to start talking about and
using Python.
First I wanna give you a little
bit of an introduction of Python.
Now it's actually an object
orientated interpreted language.
And really it's quite easy to
use in terms of other languages.
And also runs on a lot of, many operating
systems, including Mac, Windows,
Linux, and quite a few other ones as well.
It's interesting, it's actually
named after the cult comedy show
Monty Python's Flying Circus,
but [LAUGH] not after the snake.
And you'll find actually various
references to Monty Python's sketches in
the official documentation.
The good thing about Python is that it
supports a lot of basic data types,
such as numbers and strings.
But also, it supports more complex types,
like lists and
dictionaries, that can greatly
simplify data processing.
And you'll find out more about that, and
about those data types as
you move through the course.
As I mentioned it's object-orientated,
so it does support that fully and
allows multiple inheritance, which may be
nothing to you at this point in time, but
believe me, it's a good feature, and
you'll be learning about that
through the course as well.
The other thing is that the data
in Python is strongly typed, so
what I mean by that is for example,
if you attempt to add a number.
And a string, you'll actually get an
error, but it's also dynamically topped,
so you're free from worrying
about variable declarations,
and again I'll be explaining that
fully as we go through the course.
Now despite the fact that it's quite
easy to use, it's also very powerful.
Interestingly enough, it's one of the
three official languages used to Google.
Now the creator of Python, Guido van
Rossum, hope I got the pronunciation
correct, he actually worked for
Google for over seven years and
he was actually allowed to spend half his
time developing Python while he was there.
Now one important consideration
before we get into the code, and
I promise you we are getting into the code
is that the Python team decided to break
backwards compatibility
when they created Python 3.
So while it's very similar to Python 2,
and
a lot of programs will work in Python 3,
there's no longer any guarantee
that Python 2 programs will actually
work with the Python 3 interpreter.
And the other thing to
know is that there's no
further development
happening with Python 2.
So in other words, version 2.7
of Python is the final version.
But with that said, they're gonna continue
to support it until at least 2020.
But, it's really for that reason that
we chose Python 3 as the way forward.
And a lot of the code is going to work
okay for python 2, and many systems
are running it, but there are differences
as you'll find in version 2 and version 3.
So as they come up, we'll actually talk
about those differences in this course, so
you can come away with a good
understanding if you are in the situation
of having to get to the tricky part of two
code working after completing this course.
Anyway enough with the introductions.
Let's get into actually
creating some code.
So have your InteliJ open.
So we're gonna create a new project now,
so
we can start playing around with Python.
And to do that I'm gonna
click on Create New Project.
And if you recall in the previous video
I actually configured the project SDK.
So that we were able
to start using Python.
So, that's configured.
So make sure you're selecting Python
as the type we're going to be using.
The project type.
Click on Next.
I'm not gonna click on
any of those options.
I'm gonna leave them as the defaults.
Click on Next.
And next I need to know the folder
where I'm going to be putting my files.
And what I'm going to do is create
a new folder structure to put all my
Python code.
I'm gonna click on these
three little buttons here.
And I'm gonna click on a folder that
I've got from my various courses and
I'm gonna click on PythonPrograms.
So, that's my new folder that I'm going
to be creating all my projects in.
And each time I create
another Python program,
I'm gonna put it in it
s own separate folder.
And notice when I did that the first time,
IntelliJ doesn't quite get
this right cuz it's assuming,
by the actual path that I created,
that that's what I wanna call above.
What I need to do is actually delete
that and we'll call it HelloWorld.
It's gonna be our very first program and
what I'll need to do is because I'm
actually in here, I need to
actually type in HelloWorld there.
So in other words,
the path is Programs/PythonPrograms and
the project is HelloWorld.
And what will happen is IntelliJ
will create that new folder for
us automatically.
Now, depending on whether you got this
button or this option clicked down here,
that may be open or close, these
are the options that may come up, but
you can safely ignore all of those.
The main thing is the project location,
where you wanna save your files, and
the project name.
Again, this doesn't really matter to
this day, but we're gonna go ahead and
call it HelloWorld.
So we're gonna click on Finish.
And IntelliJ will come and say,
do you want me to create that folder?
Well, that's yes,
we do want you to do that.
So I'm gonna click OK.
And actually create it for
us and IntelliJ will open up.
And what I'm gonna do is go
into presentation mode, so
it's easy for you to see what I'm typing.
And the other thing to do which, note that
IntelliJ has selected that anyway, but
make sure that project view is selected.
That's the easiest one to never get
through your various false trackers that
you'll need to do doing this course.
So I'm gonna click on that and
I'm gonna open this up.
And we're actually ready to go.
So what we're gonna do first, we're
gonna go and create a new python file.
So we've created a project, and a project
can contain a number of different files.
We're gonna create a python file, so
we can actually type some code in.
So to do that, we're gonna click on,
go to the File menu.
Click on New, and then select Python File.
And notice that the kind is
automatically selected, python file.
We're gonna type in HelloWorld.
And we're gonna go press Enter or
I'm gonna click OK.
>> And
we've now got some code on the screen.
So you notice that in line 1,
IntelliJ has added that automatically.
It's added the username for
the particular machine that you're on.
So you can safely ignore that.
That'll be added automatically.
So let's actually put some code in.
And we'll start off with the hello world.
So we're gonna type in print.
Which is a command to actually type or
to display something on the screen.
And you notice as I'm typing
IntelliJ's actually coming up and
giving us some options.
So if I go back and
start to just type the letter p,
we've got quite a few options there.
And if I start typing,
the more I type the more,
sort of filtered the list
of options come up.
So eventually I've got
the exact command I wanna type,
in this case it's gonna be print.
So IntelliJ does do a lot of this work for
you in terms of trying to figure
out what you're trying to do.
And you don't actually have
to type things in full.
If you're happy that that's the correct
option, you can just press Enter.
And it actually fills in,
does the rest for you.
The other thing is, you might be looking
at those green little messages appearing
down the bottom of the screen,
you're wondering what they are.
I've actually setup a special plugin for
IntelJ to show you
the keystrokes that I'm trying.
So you won't be seeing that when you're
actually this on your computer but
it's there to help you out in case
you run another operating system and
you wanna know what keystrokes
I'm actually pressing.
So moving forward,
I'm going to type in Hello World.
And to print we use single quote,
we just type hello world,
like so, and we're ready to go.
That's literally,
that's probably the easiest Python
program you'll ever actually write.
So you've got a couple
of options here now.
To run it, we can actually
come up here and click on Run.
Go to the Run menu and select Run.
You can also here,
you can actually right-click,
and we can actually click
on Run there as well.
So it's really your personal preference
as to which way you wanna do it, so
I'm gonna click on Run.
And we notice that unsurprisingly,
little more space here.
All our words are actually
shown on the screen.
Now the other thing I wanna point out is
that you can actually choose where you get
this little window,
this little Run window to appear.
You may want the Run window for example
to appear down here, down the bottom,
instead of to the right.
I personally I prefer it to the right but
it is entirely up to you.
And if you wanted to change locations you
could come over here to this little cog,
and you can click on that and
you can actually move two,
and choose the location.
So I've currently got it selected to
the right, which is why right isn't a menu
option, but if I select bottom,
I get the little run menu down the bottom.
So it's a personal preference as
to which way you wanna go there.
And if you wanna close the window,
you can actually press X as well and
that actually closes the window down.
And we'll be going through some of the
other various features of IntelliJ as and
when needed.
But probably the important one was
the Run menu that I actually showed you.
When in doubt, there's lots of shortcuts
that you can learn in IntelliJ.
And you can come up to the various menus
and when you click them you get various
options as to the shortcuts and
what the actual commands do.
And you'll be finding that there's
lots of different shortcuts that
are built into IntelliJ really to
make your life easier as a developer,
and I'll try and show you some of
those as we go through the course.
Some of the shortcuts for
example with the project menu.
I can hold down command and
press 1 and you notice down in the bottom
it says Alt+1 for Windows or Linux.
Press it again and
it actually shuts it down.
So I haven't got that window there now.
I can press it again to bring it back.
And you can do the same for
a lot of the different windows.
Tools > indows, these various windows, we
noticed before when we were running we had
command four, that's not activated
now cuz it's not running.
But that's how you open a window or
you can close a window.
Anyway, getting back to the code.
Now although this is really probably one
of the simplest programs you can actually
write, there are actually a few
important basics to understand here.
So firstly,
we've used the Python function for print.
So Python, like many other programming
languages, has got many mathematical
functions, like round, to round the number
of digits after the decimal point,
char and ord, to convert characters
to the numerical representation,
and vice versa and
many more that are built in.
But you can also actually define your
own functions as you'll see later in
the course as well.
So to tell the print function
what you'd like printed,
you provide a value in parentheses as you
saw there, as you saw me put Hello, World!
in parentheses.
Because we're using a string, we actually
have to put a single quote to the left and
to the right of the string to tell
Python that this was a string.
But we can also put in numerical
numbers if we want it to actually
be computed by Python.
For example, I can type in print 1 + 2 and
do a couple here.
Print 7 * 6.
We can do a print without
any parameters whatsoever,
and which won't print anything.
And we could actually print the end.
And if we actually run this now.
Again, I can right click
that I wanna run it.
Down at the bottom you can see
hello world, for the first line,
which we saw in the previous
time we ran the app.
Print 1 + 2,
now to three there as you can see.
Print 7 * 6, which is 42.
And you notice print in
parenthesis without any primers,
in other words, with nothing in there.
Print in the blank line and
of course using the string again, the end,
and surprisingly printed the end.
So in regards to strings, strings
can be enclosed in either double or
single quotes.
So you saw that in the first example,
there had a single quote.
But down here at the end
I used double quotes.
So, Python doesn't mind which one you use.
You can use either, but if you want to
include a single quote in a string you
normally want it to surround
that in double quotes.
What I mean by that is I can put something
like Python strings are easy to use.
And that works okay because we've
got double quotes surrounding it and
we can also do something like this.
If we wanna use a double quote,
then we can even include quotes and
strings.
So basically if you wanna
use a particular a single or
double quote, use the opposite quote
to actually create the string.
To unlock other languages like Perl for
example,
there's no difference between
using single or double quotes.
So Python doesn't make any
distinction between those.
That said,
if you start a string with one type, then
you must finish it with the same type.
So if you need to include
a single quote in a string,
then use double quotes to enclose
a string like I mentioned.
Similarly, if you wanna
include double quotes,
then close the string in single quotes.
The other thing you can also do
is you can concatenate strings.
So in other words,
you can make a string longer by
actually putting two strings together.
So the way we can do that is we
can type print("hello" + World.
So, that's actually a distinction
to this previous line here,
where you've got one big stream.
We've actually created two independent
streams, that one and that one.
And the plus actually adds them both
together to form a master stream.
So, that basically joins
the two words together.
So I've actually got to run this now.
Down the bottom of your
file that says hello world.
And that's because it's actually joined
those two because we've used that plus to
say add those two strings together.
I'm just gonna move this run
window to the right hand corner,
to the right hand side of the screen.
Okay, so let's put in hello world.
Hello plus world example that I showed you
above isn't really very impressive, but
what we can also do is store
the strings in variables and
it makes more sense to do that.
So we can do something like this,
we can type greeting.
Equals hello.
Name equals Bruce.
Print.
Greeting plus name, and so, Enter.
And the other thing is we can also
put a space between hello and Bruce,
we could type print.
greeting +, one space in there, + 9.
I'm going to introduce
you now also to a comet.
Now a comet is where you've got
something you want to add to
sort of remind yourself perhaps, or
give you some information about a
particular bit of code that you've added.
If you put a hash, and type in something
like, some instructions for yourself.
It then enables you to type that in there.
Anything after the hash, that entire
line is ignored by the computer.
So it's there entirely for
your benefit to help you to help you to
understand a particular program better.
It's always a good idea when you are
programming to put a comments in there and
that's what this is.
This is called a comment.
Put as much information as you can in
there to remind yourself of why I've done
something in a particular way,
to help you understand.
And you'll find that when your reading
other people's program source code
that actually happens as well,
that they comment it.
You can read their comments and
actually understand it a bit better.
Just to confirm, we're gonna run this.
And you can see it's got
HelloBruce the first time.
That's because we didn't have
a space on that line there.
We had hello and Bruce without a space.
And in the second line, we actually added
a space between the words hello and
Bruce and
it actually correctly showed the space.
All right, I'm gonna end this video here
now, because it's getting a little long.
But when I come back we're gonna continue
on with our introduction to Python.
And we're gonna actually have a look
at the input function which allows you
read an unknown from a keyboard.
So, I'll see you in that next video.